---
title: https://www.forbes.com/sites/williamarruda/2017/02/01/how-pr-is-changing-and-3-modern-pr-companies-that-are-redefining-the-industry/
source_url: https://www.forbes.com/sites/williamarruda/2017/02/01/how-pr-is-changing-and-3-modern-pr-companies-that-are-redefining-the-industry/
notion_source: BAM Communications
---

If your company is looking to increase exposure, improve brand awareness, and engage with its audience, you might consider advertising or public relations. A lot has been written about how the advertising industry has evolved tremendously to stay relevant in the world of new media. There has been much less discussion about PR and its transformation. In this post, I share how the PR industry is changing, what new tools are available, and which companies are leading the charge.
In the past, PR as an industry has been highly scrutinized, due in no small part to massive retainers paired with few easily quantifiable deliverables, primary goals, and analytics to truly measure success. But PR is changing, and given my focus on personal branding and brand awareness, I've noticed a few companies that have stood out as solid examples of this new, modern PR.
These companies are changing the industry by going against traditional structures and strategies that upset clients and consumers in the past. These firms acknowledge the fact that PR involves many people beyond the traditional communications professionals in your company, and they understand that being able to measure performance builds trust with clients. Not only do these three companies know their stuff when it comes to expert PR and media exposure for clients, but they also each offer something unique that gives them an edge in this radically evolving industry.
Below are three modern PR companies and the approaches they're taking to redefine the industry:
1. Influence & Co.: Tech-Enabled Thought Leadership Content Creation And Distribution
Influence & Co. offers a fresh take on public relations by bringing thought leadership, content marketing, and digital PR together to help its clients control their messages, earn placements in reputable publications, and build true industry influence. This agency accomplishes those goals with a unique process for content creation, more than 1,500 publication relationships, and custom content marketing software to track analytics. Just by looking at the Influence & Co. site, you can see that it's building a digital content toolbox aimed at fixing a lot of the past problems with traditional PR, yielding real value and measurable ROI.
2. AirPR: Public Relations Meets Powerful Analytics
One of the most common complaints about traditional PR is how hard it is to identify ROI. This PR tech company provides businesses with PR management software solutions that help them track the success of their PR efforts. The software helps companies and PR professionals see which tactics are driving engagement and delivering a solid return and which ones need more refinement. The company is dedicated to helping you actually understand which PR efforts are driving results for your business. Measuring effectiveness in your PR efforts is critical for justifying investment, and AirPR helps you track the right data.
3. BAM Communications: More Guaranteed Deliverables And Industry-Specific Focus
BAM Communications is a PR agency that isn't shy about guaranteeing things. Right on the BAM Communications site, you can see that this team of superheroes guarantees results within the timeframe set in each client contract, or it works for free until the results are achieved. BAM Communications also specializes in tech and innovation companies; more and more PR companies will realize the value of focusing their efforts on specific industries and core competencies rather than the "full-service PR for everyone" model of the past.
It's no secret that companies today need brand awareness, media coverage, and audience engagement, and they always will. But the PR industry has been in need of an overhaul for a long time. Thankfully, there’s a burgeoning shift toward addressing the shortcomings of old PR head-on and rewriting the rules themselves. This new evolution should result in more faith in the industry because these new levels of confidence will be based on real results.
William Arruda is the cofounder of CareerBlast and author of 13 Things All Successful Professionals Do To Fuel Their Careers.
