---
title: https://www.forbes.com/sites/sophiamatveeva/2019/07/15/how-to-get-press-for-your-startup/?sh=1d7bf1e2584c
source_url: https://www.forbes.com/sites/sophiamatveeva/2019/07/15/how-to-get-press-for-your-startup/?sh=1d7bf1e2584c
notion_source: How to Get Press for Your Startup
---

" Publicity is absolutely critical. A good PR story is infinitely more effective than a front page ad ," said Richard Branson, the billionaire founder of Virgin Group. Anyone can buy fame in today’s world of digital marketing and paid influencers. Just look at the Fyre festival. However, most startups do not have the funds to fly Bella Hadid to a private island. Unless a startup can throw money at the problem, has funding from the likes of Branson or Gwyneth Paltrow as founder, the founders have to be creative to get known.
While the cost of paid media is going up, with Google and Facebook taking up most of the digital marketing pie, earned media's barriers to entry have remained the same. If your story is interesting, it gets printed. Earned media is just that – media coverage is earned when journalists decide that your story is thought-provoking or newsworthy.
I worked in a top PR agency before I co-founded a tech platform, and know from experience that even an agency with the best contacts cannot get a boring story placed. This is great news for startups, because with the press money does not buy you love.
Using my PR skills to grow Enty has made a big impact on our business and has allowed us to appear bigger and more established than we are. It has opened doors and given us credibility, grown our user base and impressed investors.
Melissa Harris, my MBA classmate from the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, and Founder and CEO of marketing and communications agency M. Harris & Co., works with startups, typically after they have raised Series A. She says, "startups have two goals for getting press coverage: sales and fundraising." I have used the press for both, and while the outlets are different, the approach is the same.
Find your point of view
First, write out three to five points that you want to be known about your business. These are going to be similar to what you use with investors and customers.
Your key messages can be not only about your company, but also in contrast to something else. For example, when our company launched, fintech startups were getting media hype, so I argued that fashion tech is an overlooked opportunity and fintech is overfunded. Knowing how to hook your company to the zeitgeist of today, even as a contrast, can be a good way to be noticed.
Do not worry about not having a journalist network to begin with. Harris says, “PR is 70% the message and 30% the messenger. If your message is interesting enough, it can become a story without a prior relationship.”
Build your media network
While a network of journalists is not necessary to get your initial media coverage, building one helps in the long run. Going to events for your sector is helpful, as is asking your supporters for introductions. Every month, I send out an update to our investors and advisors, where I ask them for what we need, including introductions to journalists. If you ask enough people enough times, someone will get you what you want.
When you do meet journalists, do not expect your startup to be covered straight away. Often, you will meet to tell the journalist your story and unique point of view before they even think about coverage. Since PR is a long game, check in with the journalist every few months to stay front of mind.
Start small
It is very unlikely that your startup’s first piece of media coverage will be in Forbes or the New York Times. Instead, focus on blogs and trade publications for your sector, because they are less competitive than the national press.
Entrepreneurship is a fashionable subject today and many companies run blogs featuring interviews with startup founders. If the company’s customer base is similar to yours, pitch yourself as an interview subject, even if the company’s product is completely different. I once gave an interview to a blog ran by Hanx, a vegan condom brand, because their marketing strategy is aimed at female consumers, just like ours is.
Starting with smaller blogs means you practice your interview style, have a record on Google when someone searches your company and grow awareness of your brand. Being covered positively on a small website is better than not being covered at all.
Create high quality free content
You can begin by creating high quality free content on your own company’s blog or on Medium. Providing useful content not only tells people about your brand, it also shows editors that you are capable of writing well. After you have some high-quality free content on your blog, try pitching your articles to industry publications. Again, start with smaller publications and become known as an expert before pitching to national media brands. Being a respected guest contributor often leads to more opportunities, like speaking at investor conferences.
Once you are in the press, your achievement is ever-green. You can use the press coverage to impress investors, clients and partners long after it comes out by including it in your sales materials or on your website. Since the benefits of PR efforts tend to accrue over time, it makes sense for founders to begin early.
Like anything worth doing, building your company’s brand in the press is not easy. If you learn the basics and invest the effort, you can have truly meaningful, long term results, and have some fun in the process.
